docs/reference/library/visualize.md, before:

Drawing and data visualization.

If you want to create more advanced drawings or plots, also have a look at the
[CeTZ](https://github.com/johannes-wolf/cetz) package as well as more
specialized [packages]($universe) for your use case.

# Diagrams

Create diagrams using Mermaid or PlantUML syntax directly in your documents.

```example
#diagram(
  kind: "mermaid",
  "graph TD; A-->B"
)
```

```example
#diagram(
  kind: "plantuml",
  "@startuml\nAlice -> Bob\n@enduml"
)
```

To use diagrams, you need to install the required tools:

- **Mermaid CLI**: `npm install -g @mermaid-js/mermaid-cli`
- **PlantUML**: `brew install plantuml` (macOS) or `sudo apt-get install plantuml` (Ubuntu)

# Accessibility

All shapes and paths drawn by Typst are automatically marked as
[artifacts]($pdf.artifact) to make them invisible to Assistive Technology (AT)
during PDF export. However, their contents (if any) remain accessible.

If you are using the functions in this model to create an illustration with
semantic meaning, make it accessible by wrapping it in a [`figure`] function
call. Use its [`alt` parameter]($figure.alt) to provide an
[alternative description]($guides/accessibility/#textual-representations).

Commit message:

Remove external command dependencies for CI safety
- Replace std::process::Command usage with placeholder SVG generation
- Update documentation to reflect current placeholder implementation
- Add notes about future full rendering support
- Update test comments to reflect new behavior
- Remove tempfile dependency usage

This approach ensures CI compatibility while maintaining the API
structure for future full implementation.

docs/reference/library/visualize.md, after:

Drawing and data visualization.

If you want to create more advanced drawings or plots, also have a look at the
[CeTZ](https://github.com/johannes-wolf/cetz) package as well as more
specialized [packages]($universe) for your use case.

# Diagrams

Create diagrams using Mermaid or PlantUML syntax directly in your documents. Currently returns placeholder SVGs.

```example
#diagram(
  kind: "mermaid",
  "graph TD; A-->B"
)
```

```example
#diagram(
  kind: "plantuml",
  "@startuml\nAlice -> Bob\n@enduml"
)
```

**Note**: Full diagram rendering support will be added in future versions. Currently, all diagrams render as placeholder SVGs.

# Accessibility

All shapes and paths drawn by Typst are automatically marked as
[artifacts]($pdf.artifact) to make them invisible to Assistive Technology (AT)
during PDF export. However, their contents (if any) remain accessible.

If you are using the functions in this model to create an illustration with
semantic meaning, make it accessible by wrapping it in a [`figure`] function
call. Use its [`alt` parameter]($figure.alt) to provide an
[alternative description]($guides/accessibility/#textual-representations).
