docs/tutorial/2-formatting.md, before:

---
description: Typst's tutorial.
---

# Formatting
So far, you have written a report with some text, a few equations and images.
However, it still looks very plain. Your teaching assistant does not yet know
that you are using a new typesetting system, and you want your report to fit in
with the other student's submissions. In this chapter, we will see how to format
your report using Typst's styling system.

## Set rules
As we have seen in the previous chapter, Typst has functions that _insert_
content (e.g., the [`image`] function) and others that _manipulate_ content that
they received as arguments (e.g., the [`align`] function). The first impulse you
might have when you want, for example, to justify the report, could be to look
for a function that does that and wrap the complete document in it.

```example
= Background
#par(justify: true)[
  In the case of glaciers, fluid
  dynamics principles can be used
  to understand how the movement
  and behaviour of the ice is
  influenced by factors such as
  temperature, pressure, and the
  presence of other fluids (such as
  water).
]
```

Wait, shouldn't all arguments of a function be specified within parentheses? Why
is there a second set of square brackets with content _after_ the parentheses?
The answer is that, as passing content to a function is such a common thing to
do in Typst, there is special syntax for it: Instead of putting the content
inside the argument list, you can write it in square brackets directly after the
normal arguments, saving on punctuation.

As seen above, that works. The [`par`] function justifies all paragraphs within
it. However, wrapping the document in countless functions can quickly become
cumbersome.

Fortunately, Typst has a more elegant solution. With _set rules,_ you can apply
style properties to all occurrences of some kind of content. You write a set
rule by entering the `{set}` keyword, followed by the name of the function whose
properties you want to set, and a list of arguments in parentheses.

```example
#set par(justify: true)

= Background
In the case of glaciers, fluid
dynamics principles can be used
to understand how the movement
and behaviour of the ice is
influenced by factors such as
temperature, pressure, and the
presence of other fluids (such as
water).
```

<div class="info-box">
Want to know in more technical terms what is happening here?

Set rules can be conceptualized as setting default values
for some of the parameters of a function for all future
uses of that function.
</div>

## The autocomplete panel { #autocomplete }
If you followed along and tried a few things in the app, you might have noticed
that always after you enter a `#` character, a panel pops up to show you the
available functions, and, within an argument list, the available parameters.
That's the autocomplete panel. It can be very useful while you are writing your
document: You can apply its suggestions by hitting the Return key or navigate to
the desired completion with the arrow keys. The panel can be dismissed by
hitting the Escape key and opened again by typing `#` or hitting
<kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>Space</kbd>. Use the autocomplete panel to discover the
right arguments for functions. Most suggestions come with a small description of
what they do.

![Autocomplete panel](2-formatting-autocomplete.png)

## Set up the page { #page-setup }
Back to set rules: When writing a rule, you choose the function depending on
what type of element you want to style. Here is a list of some functions that
are commonly used in set rules:

- [`text`] to set font family, size, color, and other properties of text
- [`page`] to set the page size, margins, headers, enable columns, and footers
- [`par`] to justify paragraphs, set line spacing, and more
- [`heading`] to set the appearance of headings and enable numbering
- [`document`] to set the metadata contained in the PDF output, such as title
  and author

Not all function parameters can be set. In general, only parameters that tell
a function _how_ to do something can be set, not those that tell it _what_ to
do it with. The function reference pages indicate which parameters are settable.

Let's add a few more styles to our document. We want larger margins and a serif
font. For the purposes of the example, we'll also set another page size.

```example
#set page(
  paper: "a6",
  margin: (x: 1.8cm, y: 1.5cm),
)
#set text(
  font: "New Computer Modern",
  size: 10pt
)
#set par(
  justify: true,
  leading: 0.52em,
)

= Introduction
In this report, we will explore the
various factors that influence fluid
dynamics in glaciers and how they
contribute to the formation and
behaviour of these natural structures.

>>> Glacier displacement is influenced
>>> by a number of factors, including
>>> + The climate
>>> + The topography
>>> + The geology
>>>
>>> This report will present a physical
>>> model of glacier displacement and
>>> dynamics, and will explore the
>>> influence of these factors on the
>>> movement of large bodies of ice.
<<< ...

#align(center + bottom)[
  #image("glacier.jpg", width: 70%)

  *Glaciers form an important
  part of the earth's climate
  system.*
]
```

There are a few things of note here.

First is the [`page`] set rule. It receives two arguments: the page size and
margins for the page. The page size is a string. Typst accepts [many standard
page sizes,]($page.paper) but you can also specify a custom page size. The
margins are specified as a [dictionary.]($dictionary) Dictionaries are a
collection of key-value pairs. In this case, the keys are `x` and `y`, and the
values are the horizontal and vertical margins, respectively. We could also have
specified separate margins for each side by passing a dictionary with the keys
`{left}`, `{right}`, `{top}`, and `{bottom}`.

Next is the set [`text`] set rule. Here, we set the font size to `{10pt}` and
font family to `{"New Computer Modern"}`. The Typst app comes with many fonts
that you can try for your document. When you are in the text function's argument
list, you can discover the available fonts in the autocomplete panel.

We have also set the spacing between lines (a.k.a. leading): It is specified as
a [length] value, and we used the `em` unit to specify the leading relative to
the size of the font: `{1em}` is equivalent to the current font size (which
defaults to `{11pt}`).

Finally, we have bottom aligned our image by adding a vertical alignment to our
center alignment. Vertical and horizontal alignments can be combined with the
`{+}` operator to yield a 2D alignment.

## A hint of sophistication { #sophistication }
To structure our document more clearly, we now want to number our headings. We
can do this by setting the `numbering` parameter of the [`heading`] function.

```example
>>> #set text(font: "New Computer Modern")
#set heading(numbering: "1.")

= Introduction
#lorem(10)

== Background
#lorem(12)

== Methods
#lorem(15)
```

We specified the string `{"1."}` as the numbering parameter. This tells Typst to
number the headings with arabic numerals and to put a dot between the number of
each level. We can also use [letters, roman numerals, and symbols]($numbering)
for our headings:

```example
>>> #set text(font: "New Computer Modern")
#set heading(numbering: "1.a")

= Introduction
#lorem(10)

== Background
#lorem(12)

== Methods
#lorem(15)
```

This example also uses the [`lorem`] function to generate some placeholder text.
This function takes a number as an argument and generates that many words of
_Lorem Ipsum_ text.

<div class="info-box">

Did you wonder why the headings and text set rules apply to all text and headings,
even if they are not produced with the respective functions?

Typst internally calls the `heading` function every time you write
`[= Conclusion]`. In fact, the function call `[#heading[Conclusion]]` is
equivalent to the heading markup above. Other markup elements work similarly,
they are only _syntax sugar_ for the corresponding function calls.
</div>

## Show rules
You are already pretty happy with how this turned out. But one last thing needs
to be fixed: The report you are writing is intended for a larger project and
that project's name should always be accompanied by a logo, even in prose.

You consider your options. You could add an `[#image("logo.svg")]` call before
every instance of the logo using search and replace. That sounds very tedious.
Instead, you could maybe
[define a custom function]($function/#defining-functions) that always yields the
logo with its image. However, there is an even easier way:

With show rules, you can redefine how Typst displays certain elements. You
specify which elements Typst should show differently and how they should look.
Show rules can be applied to instances of text, many functions, and even the
whole document.

```example
#show "ArtosFlow": name => box[
  #box(image(
    "logo.svg",
    height: 0.7em,
  ))
  #name
]

This report is embedded in the
ArtosFlow project. ArtosFlow is a
project of the Artos Institute.
```

There is a lot of new syntax in this example: We write the `{show}` keyword,
followed by a string of text we want to show differently and a colon. Then, we
write a function that takes the content that shall be shown as an argument.
Here, we called that argument `name`. We can now use the `name` variable in the
function's body to print the ArtosFlow name. Our show rule adds the logo image
in front of the name and puts the result into a box to prevent linebreaks from
occurring between logo and name. The image is also put inside of a box, so that
it does not appear in its own paragraph.

The calls to the first box function and the image function did not require a
leading `#` because they were not embedded directly in markup. When Typst
expects code instead of markup, the leading `#` is not needed to access
functions, keywords, and variables. This can be observed in parameter lists,
function definitions, and [code blocks]($scripting).

## Review
You now know how to apply basic formatting to your Typst documents. You learned
how to set the font, justify your paragraphs, change the page dimensions, and
add numbering to your headings with set rules. You also learned how to use a
basic show rule to change how text appears throughout your document.

You have handed in your report. Your supervisor was so happy with it that they
want to adapt it into a conference paper! In the next section, we will learn how
to format your document as a paper using more advanced show rules and functions.

Commit message:

Change the par example to underline

docs/tutorial/2-formatting.md, after:

---
description: Typst's tutorial.
---

# Formatting
So far, you have written a report with some text, a few equations and images.
However, it still looks very plain. Your teaching assistant does not yet know
that you are using a new typesetting system, and you want your report to fit in
with the other student's submissions. In this chapter, we will see how to format
your report using Typst's styling system.

## Set rules
As we have seen in the previous chapter, Typst has functions that _insert_
content (e.g., the [`image`] function) and others that _manipulate_ content that
they received as arguments (e.g., the [`align`] function). The first impulse you
might have when you want, for example, to underline text with dotted line, could
be to look for a function that does that and wrap the desired text in it.

```example
Let's make a #underline(stroke: (dash: "dotted"))[simple] sentence example
and use it #underline(stroke: (dash: "dotted"))[here].
```

Wait, shouldn't all arguments of a function be specified within parentheses? Why
is there a second set of square brackets with content _after_ the parentheses?
The answer is that, as passing content to a function is such a common thing to
do in Typst, there is special syntax for it: Instead of putting the content
inside the argument list, you can write it in square brackets directly after the
normal arguments, saving on punctuation.

As seen above, that works. The [`underline`] function draws a dotted line under
the text. However, wrapping the document in countless functions (or just a
single bulky one) can quickly become cumbersome.

Fortunately, Typst has a more elegant solution. With _set rules_, you can apply
style properties to all occurrences of some kind of content. You write a set
rule by entering the `{set}` keyword, followed by the name of the function whose
properties you want to set, and a list of arguments in parentheses.

```example
#set underline(stroke: (dash: "dotted"))

Let's make a #underline[simple] sentence example and use it #underline[here].
```

<div class="info-box">
Want to know in more technical terms what is happening here?

Set rules can be conceptualized as setting default values
for some of the parameters of a function for all future
uses of that function.
</div>

## The autocomplete panel { #autocomplete }
If you followed along and tried a few things in the app, you might have noticed
that always after you enter a `#` character, a panel pops up to show you the
available functions, and, within an argument list, the available parameters.
That's the autocomplete panel. It can be very useful while you are writing your
document: You can apply its suggestions by hitting the Return key or navigate to
the desired completion with the arrow keys. The panel can be dismissed by
hitting the Escape key and opened again by typing `#` or hitting
<kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>Space</kbd>. Use the autocomplete panel to discover the
right arguments for functions. Most suggestions come with a small description of
what they do.

![Autocomplete panel](2-formatting-autocomplete.png)

## Set up the page { #page-setup }
Back to set rules: When writing a rule, you choose the function depending on
what type of element you want to style. Here is a list of some functions that
are commonly used in set rules:

- [`text`] to set font family, size, color, and other properties of text
- [`page`] to set the page size, margins, headers, enable columns, and footers
- [`par`] to justify paragraphs, set line spacing, and more
- [`heading`] to set the appearance of headings and enable numbering
- [`document`] to set the metadata contained in the PDF output, such as title
  and author

Not all function parameters can be set. In general, only parameters that tell
a function _how_ to do something can be set, not those that tell it _what_ to
do it with. The function reference pages indicate which parameters are settable.

Let's add a few more styles to our document. We want larger margins and a serif
font. For the purposes of the example, we'll also set another page size.

```example
#set page(
  paper: "a6",
  margin: (x: 1.8cm, y: 1.5cm),
)
#set text(
  font: "New Computer Modern",
  size: 10pt
)
#set par(
  justify: true,
  leading: 0.52em,
)

= Introduction
In this report, we will explore the
various factors that influence fluid
dynamics in glaciers and how they
contribute to the formation and
behaviour of these natural structures.

>>> Glacier displacement is influenced
>>> by a number of factors, including
>>> + The climate
>>> + The topography
>>> + The geology
>>>
>>> This report will present a physical
>>> model of glacier displacement and
>>> dynamics, and will explore the
>>> influence of these factors on the
>>> movement of large bodies of ice.
<<< ...

#align(center + bottom)[
  #image("glacier.jpg", width: 70%)

  *Glaciers form an important
  part of the earth's climate
  system.*
]
```

There are a few things of note here.

First is the [`page`] set rule. It receives two arguments: the page size and
margins for the page. The page size is a string. Typst accepts [many standard
page sizes,]($page.paper) but you can also specify a custom page size. The
margins are specified as a [dictionary.]($dictionary) Dictionaries are a
collection of key-value pairs. In this case, the keys are `x` and `y`, and the
values are the horizontal and vertical margins, respectively. We could also have
specified separate margins for each side by passing a dictionary with the keys
`{left}`, `{right}`, `{top}`, and `{bottom}`.

Next is the set [`text`] set rule. Here, we set the font size to `{10pt}` and
font family to `{"New Computer Modern"}`. The Typst app comes with many fonts
that you can try for your document. When you are in the text function's argument
list, you can discover the available fonts in the autocomplete panel.

We have also set the spacing between lines (a.k.a. leading): It is specified as
a [length] value, and we used the `em` unit to specify the leading relative to
the size of the font: `{1em}` is equivalent to the current font size (which
defaults to `{11pt}`).

Finally, we have bottom aligned our image by adding a vertical alignment to our
center alignment. Vertical and horizontal alignments can be combined with the
`{+}` operator to yield a 2D alignment.

## A hint of sophistication { #sophistication }
To structure our document more clearly, we now want to number our headings. We
can do this by setting the `numbering` parameter of the [`heading`] function.

```example
>>> #set text(font: "New Computer Modern")
#set heading(numbering: "1.")

= Introduction
#lorem(10)

== Background
#lorem(12)

== Methods
#lorem(15)
```

We specified the string `{"1."}` as the numbering parameter. This tells Typst to
number the headings with arabic numerals and to put a dot between the number of
each level. We can also use [letters, roman numerals, and symbols]($numbering)
for our headings:

```example
>>> #set text(font: "New Computer Modern")
#set heading(numbering: "1.a")

= Introduction
#lorem(10)

== Background
#lorem(12)

== Methods
#lorem(15)
```

This example also uses the [`lorem`] function to generate some placeholder text.
This function takes a number as an argument and generates that many words of
_Lorem Ipsum_ text.

<div class="info-box">

Did you wonder why the headings and text set rules apply to all text and headings,
even if they are not produced with the respective functions?

Typst internally calls the `heading` function every time you write
`[= Conclusion]`. In fact, the function call `[#heading[Conclusion]]` is
equivalent to the heading markup above. Other markup elements work similarly,
they are only _syntax sugar_ for the corresponding function calls.
</div>

## Show rules
You are already pretty happy with how this turned out. But one last thing needs
to be fixed: The report you are writing is intended for a larger project and
that project's name should always be accompanied by a logo, even in prose.

You consider your options. You could add an `[#image("logo.svg")]` call before
every instance of the logo using search and replace. That sounds very tedious.
Instead, you could maybe
[define a custom function]($function/#defining-functions) that always yields the
logo with its image. However, there is an even easier way:

With show rules, you can redefine how Typst displays certain elements. You
specify which elements Typst should show differently and how they should look.
Show rules can be applied to instances of text, many functions, and even the
whole document.

```example
#show "ArtosFlow": name => box[
  #box(image(
    "logo.svg",
    height: 0.7em,
  ))
  #name
]

This report is embedded in the
ArtosFlow project. ArtosFlow is a
project of the Artos Institute.
```

There is a lot of new syntax in this example: We write the `{show}` keyword,
followed by a string of text we want to show differently and a colon. Then, we
write a function that takes the content that shall be shown as an argument.
Here, we called that argument `name`. We can now use the `name` variable in the
function's body to print the ArtosFlow name. Our show rule adds the logo image
in front of the name and puts the result into a box to prevent linebreaks from
occurring between logo and name. The image is also put inside of a box, so that
it does not appear in its own paragraph.

The calls to the first box function and the image function did not require a
leading `#` because they were not embedded directly in markup. When Typst
expects code instead of markup, the leading `#` is not needed to access
functions, keywords, and variables. This can be observed in parameter lists,
function definitions, and [code blocks]($scripting).

## Review
You now know how to apply basic formatting to your Typst documents. You learned
how to set the font, justify your paragraphs, change the page dimensions, and
add numbering to your headings with set rules. You also learned how to use a
basic show rule to change how text appears throughout your document.

You have handed in your report. Your supervisor was so happy with it that they
want to adapt it into a conference paper! In the next section, we will learn how
to format your document as a paper using more advanced show rules and functions.
